Interviewing Dr. Newton Ellis, head of the
Department of Industrial Engineering. Today's
date is July 29, 1981. Dr. Ellis, could we begin by
you telling us something about your personal
background, where you grew up?
Well, I was born in Texas. I was born in Northeast
Texas. But I grew up pretty much all over the U.S. My
dad bought a construction. And as a result, I lived
in several states and went to several schools,
sometimes as many as a half a dozen to a dozen
different schools in one year. Where were you born
in? I was born in Paris, Texas. Where were some of
the states that you lived in? Well, most of the
states
were southwest
states,
picking up from probably as far west as Arizona. It
was coming around to New Mexico, and then to
Louisiana, Arkansas, Tennessee. It was for some
time briefly in New Jersey and New York.
I'm from Louisiana. I've heard you live in
Louisiana. I'm from the amendment which is 30
miles east of there. When
did you graduate from high school and where? I
graduated from high school in 1950 from Texas City
High School. You had an interest in mathematics
and engineering as a student? As a high school
student, I was very much
interested in engineering, math, quantitative
aspects of education. That's one of the reasons I
wound up at Texas A&M. When you graduated in 1950,
you went to Texas A&M as a student? I came to Texas
A&M as a freshman. I was majoring in industrial
engineering, spent three years here, and became
intrigued with the human side of engineering.
Industrial engineering was the closest to that,
but it didn't quite have what I thought I was
interested in. That's one of the reasons I didn't
finish my degree. What did you do after you left
here? Well after, I spent about three years, in
fact I was in
my senior year, and I had a long talk with the wind
department about my interests that were more
focused in respect to people and less focused in
the areas of engineering. And he recommended that
I probably ought to look into a different
curriculum. Not knowing a whole lot about the
curriculums that might be available. which
focused me on the human being. Someone told me
about psychology
and I transferred to Baylor
and picked up a major
in psychology. I finished there in 1956. Okay,
what were some of the, since you moved around so
much in your boyhood, what are some of the things
you remember about that?
Well, did you find that every place was pretty much
the same, or did you find that there was a lot of
differences? I found there was a lot of
differences. I guess that was really my first
brush. Again, I was very young still, but it was
my first brush at problems associated
with,
or that had racial overtones associated with it.
Areas of...
Northeast
Texas and into Louisiana, there was a great
problem, I would say, with the standpoint of the
lights. I got into Tennessee, and there was a
problem associated with the, again, I don't know
the exact terminology, so I'll say the hillbilly
element. That may not be the proper terminology,
but it had those types of overtones. I also
lived in California,
I forgot to mention that. California also was
going at that particular time, as I recall it, was
the first years of integration. And I remember
quite a few problems associated with integration
with the school system in San Diego. And I would say
that traveling around gave me a better
understanding of the people. I probably wouldn't
have gained by moving in a single area and growing
up in a single area. That was probably the main
contribution. Other than that, it's seeing some
of the different things that existed in different
parts of the U.S. In 1956, when you graduated from
Baylor with a bachelor's in psychology, what did
you do then? Well, I thought I was ready to enter
into something that tied engineering and
psychology together.
You mean something like efficiency engineering?
Well, after the fact, I would say this was 56, about
60 really the field of engineering psychology
began to emerge. Prior to that, I guess I was before
my time, I took a job that I really couldn't find a
job I was interested in. I discovered
that if you do anything with a psychology degree,
you need a graduate degree. So I took a job in Temco
Aircraft as the payroll department, payroll
insurance department. I ran the night shift.
Where? At Grand Prairie. And it was there that
having that job permitted me to initiate I'm
trying to protect this Christian university. I
wound up getting a master's degree and a PhD
degree, but during the process, about 61,
aerospace was beginning to catch on. An emerging
field column at that time called engineering
psychology was beginning to catch on in
aerospace. It was a technology that was to deal
with trying to design equipment to fit the person,
to fit the pilot.
It was called engineering psychology. We
transitioned then to another thing called human
engineering. And over the years, eventually
transitioned
into a field called human factors engineering. So
I was perfectly trained in engineering and in
psychology. It was a perfect marriage between my
training and my interest. Consequently, that was
the reason. spent the time in aerospace after
graduation. When did you complete your master's?
I completed my master's in 62 and I completed my PhD
in 64. Both at TCU? Both at TCU. The reason for that,
I was employed at LTV at the time where I
transitioned to Temco, Chance Fault. I worked at
the Leintemko vintage in Leintemko-Bach, the
transition companies. Is it still called
Leintemko-Bach? No, it's called LTB. They
dropped the full use of names and just used
initials. I spent 10 years with them. Okay, then
that brings us to 1964. What did you do then? Well, I
was employed. At the same time I was working on a
degree, I was employed. I was in a program
that permitted me to work in the school.
And I was working in the, I believe it was called
Human Engineering and Safety Department. When I
finished my degree in 64, I had the opportunity to
go back to where I was, or stay in the department. I
was going to go to a new development department in
this space. Astronautics Division,
where the emphasis would be placed on designing
equipment not for the pilot, but for the
astronaut. And I felt like that was at the cutting
edge of technology, and I chose to go with the
Astronautics Division. I spent the next two years
or so there, and worked on some space systems. the
design team that worked on some of the spacesuits,
some of the Jiminy, early Jiminy space missions,
and the development of what was called an
astronaut maneuvering unit, something that
permitted the astronaut
to buckle on or secure to his back, a la Buck Rogers
style, and get out of the vehicle and motor around
through space. It was one of the Jiminy missions.
This was while you were still at LTV? Yes.
Okay, you stayed there until 1969? No, I left
there. I had an opportunity to move up. It must have
been 1960...
I'll say 66, somewhere in that vicinity. I took a
job at a
senior scientist of a small research group called
Life Sciences Incorporated.
It was a high technology research group having to
do with
human behavior as it related to complex hardware
systems.
And I spent back time
until I came
in. I was there a couple of years. I don't recall
exactly
how long. A couple of years or so. It was a small
group, probably having about 25 employees and all
of them PhDs. And we probably did about a half
million dollar business. And LTV, with a big
program developing in LTV about 68, I think I was in
life sciences two years. And they came and asked me
to come back, take a special job in advanced
systems. It had to do with being a part of a special
group of engineers that were to try to define
aerospace systems of the future. That intrigued
me. I came back
to it. Okay, Dr. Ellis, would you discuss your
coming to Texas A&M in 1969, please? Well, I was
right in the middle of a major proposal after LTV,
and I received a telephone call from a Bill
Wortham. He told me he was head of the Department of
Industrial Engineering at Texas A&M. He caught me
at a bad time because, like I said, we were in a
proposal effort. It had been going on for about
three months. We'd probably been spending about
60 hours a week or more in that proposal effort. He
caught me right as we were beginning to close out,
and he caught me at a bad time. And he said he wanted
to talk to me about the possibility of a job, a
teaching job at Texas A&M. I told him that I wasn't
interested in a teaching job at Texas A&M and that
he had caught me at a bad time and I basically
appreciated it but he didn't keep me and I sort of
cut him off. But he was a persistent person and he
called me back. At this time we had finished the
proposal effort and I was in a slow down period and
was in a much better mood. He was a good salesman
too. He talked to me about some of the things he was
trying to do at Texas A&M. And Bill Wortham turned
out to be a person that had come from the Dallas area
from Texas Instruments. And he was up to speed on
what I considered some of the newer developing
engineering technologies at the time. One of them
happened to be human factors engineering, and he
said he was trying to develop an industrial
engineering department that would emphasize
these. He talked about maintainability,
reliability,
safety, and he said, I'm looking for someone to
help us in the human factors field, and I've been
told you're it.
I told him I really wasn't. Well, I had in the back of
my mind the idea of coming to into university
sometime to teach, but this was not the time. I was
very comfortable with where I was. I'd just come
back to LTV and been there probably a year or a
little less. I can't remember exactly. I told him I
really wasn't interested in a teaching job at this
time, maybe two or three years. He said, well, why
don't you just come down and visit? Take a look at
what we've got here. Let's talk. Well, he called me
the time we had just finished that proposal. I
didn't have a whole lot to do. I was in between sort
of projects. I was trying to catch up on some needed
rest anyway. And I said, well, as long as there's no
obligation, if you realize that, I'll be glad to
come down. I've got some extra time. And I came down
and spent a couple of days. And I was sold
immediately.
Bill Wortham was a good salesman. But more than
that, I was sold on Texas A&M. I was sold on what the
department was doing. And I was immediately
caught up in the potential that existed. My wife's
from over in Somerville. She was spending the day
over there. We came back and we went through
College Station. She said, you know, I could never
live here. I always lived in the Dallas area. She
said, you could never live in a small community
like this. I hope you didn't get interested,
weren't interested in a job. And I didn't tell her
that I was until we got back to Dallas. And a couple
of days later, I told her I was interested in that
job. She said, oh, no, I don't think we could live
down there. Bryan College Station was much
smaller then than it is now.
To make a long story short, she said, I'd like to go
back down. So we came back down. At the time, I think
there was about three houses available in the
whole community to look at. And they were
building. Oaks out here, and was actually
building a house that she was sort of interested
in. Anyway, we came back, and she said, well, of
course, if I wanted to come, she certainly would
like to come with me and learn about that. But she
made the deal. She said, well, I'll tell you what.
You'll purchase a house like we have here, and
you'll always get season tickets to all the
sporting events. She's a big sports fan. Maybe
I'll, not kidding me, she said, maybe I can move
with you. And of course, it wound up we did. And she
just immediately fell in love with the community.
She just didn't realize, not living here at the
time, what was really available in the small
community. There's a more cohesiveness.
Merchants were more willing to help you. Banks
were more willing to make that personal touch. And
my daughter was just going into junior high. She
immediately, sometime during that year, said,
I'm going to Texas A&M. Well, you know, that hurt
her. She'll change her mind many times before
that, but she didn't. She never wavered. And she
graduated last year. But that's how we came. Bill
Wortham... insisted that I come down and I was very
much intrigued with him, the department. I got to
meet Dean Benson while I was here. I was very much
impressed with him as an individual and I was just
caught up in the potential that existed.
And what was the position that you took when you
came here? I had not had any teaching experience.
They told me that I would have to start as an
assistant professor, but that I would be promoted
fairly quickly. That's what happened. But I came
as an assistant professor in industrial
engineering and as a researcher with the Texas
Transportation Institute, a joint appointment,
research and teaching. And you held that until you
became department head? No, there's quite a bit of
development and change in there. Of course, I was
promoted to associate professor the second year.
I think I served a system for up to two years. During
the process of research at TTI, which is part of the
engineering experiment station,
I was able to sell the then directoratees of TTI,
Jack Keyes, on the need to emphasize the driver in
transportation research. TTI had built an image
and an excellent reputation on what you might call
the hardware, the cement, the bridges, the
roadways, the things. But it never had a real
emphasis on the driver as part of the
transportation system. And due to my experience
and interest, and sort of sold him on the idea.
Sometimes,
three years later, four years later, I'm not sure
about the exact time, he, due to my somewhat
success in developing research in that area, he
developed a program, TTI, associated with the
driver.
I can't remember the name of the program. Highway
Traffic Safety Programs. And I was the program
manager. We started with about myself and about
three people. And within two years, we were about
30 people.
And we then organized the division TTI set up with
an umbrella
over I think there were five divisions of
research. One being highways and structures and
bridges and so forth. And the sixth division was
formed having to do with human factors and systems
engineering. And I became the division head of
that particular division. And it was Again, it was
TTI's first
emphasis in the area of research associated with
the driver and the transportation element. That
was actually when I developed my
I guess the development of the research side of my
personality, Texas A&M. In the meantime, the
department was growing and there was the idea of
trying to have a human factors engineering
division in the department at the graduate level.
That was organized somewhere during the time and I
was made division in that.
That sort of takes me up through at the time that
there was a change. Actually, we had two changes in
department heads. Bill Wortham stepped down and
eventually left. Paul Newell was department head
for, it seemed like, about three years. And when he
stepped down, that's when I became department
head. What was that? Seventy-five. Could you
explain briefly? in layman's terms, what an
industrial engineer does on the job?
I'm not as competent, probably, in defining what
industrial engineering does, per se, because my
training and experience was in
probably an auxiliary area of the field. But
primarily industrial engineering is a
technology that tries to optimize the
relationships between
the hardware that's necessary to produce a
product and the person that's necessary to run the
hardware that's to produce the product.
An industrial engineer is a part of that. He's the
engineer that facilitates the relationship
between man, machine, and resources such that you
can produce a product. Efficiency engineer is a
type of industrial
engineer. the quality control, the constant
overview of the planning and the manufacturing
process, the management engineer, all that fits
the industrial engineering. How many faculty
members do you have in the department?
You mean the number of people in the classroom?
Just under your supervision in this particular
department? Well, again, that's In terms of the
number of people it takes to teach our classes, we
probably run close to 100. But in terms of
full-time faculty that are assistant professors
and above, I think we have 61. And we have to pull in
people from other parts of the university. We use
our own students just to teach the classes, do the
size of the program.
About how many students do you have enrolled for a
degree in industrial engineering? Well, let me
say something about industrial engineering.
Industrial engineering is, I guess, is probably
the only department in the university, if not the
only.
I can't think of any others like it. I think it's the
only department that administers five different
degree programs. This department administers
the computer science program, the industrial
engineering program, the bioengineering
program, the safety engineering program, and the
industrial hygiene program. Each one of those has
its own set of faculty, its own set of students, but
it's administered under the umbrella of one
department, industrial engineering. Okay, now
within that, on those total programs, there's
just under 1,800
students. 306 of those are graduate students.
About 80 of those graduate students are Ph.D.
students.
How long had you been offering a Ph.D. degree in
industrial engineering? That goes back before my
time, so I really couldn't tell you that. must have
been somewhere in the early 60s.
The only degree program, the new degree program
that's been instituted since I've been
department head is the Bioengineering Master's
and Ph.D. program and that must have been about 75
and
the safety engineering program, undergraduate
and master's program, which is probably about two
years old. Well, PhD in computer science began in
1969. I don't know if there were some other ones
before that. Yes, there were. The IE program is
much older than that. I just don't know when it was.
I would say that probably
either the early 60s or maybe even the late 50s.
Could you comment on the quality of the students
enrolled in this
department, particularly referring to the
incoming students? Well, I think that as the
statistics show, the quality of the incoming
student has been improving over the last six or
seven years of growth. We're getting a better
student now. There's no doubt about that. We're
not only getting more students, actually more
than we can really handle, but we are getting a
better student as well. I know the board
yesterday, the past day, at least agreed to some
kind of role in management policy that would
upgrade the standards in terms of SAT scores for
students before you finish your high school
class. But even here, I'm not sure that's going to
affect the growth in engineering that much
because we've been getting a very, very good
student the last few years anyway. That would seem
to contradict the public perception of the news
media that the quality of students is declining.
Do you find that the case? Well, I can only say
overall, all the statistics would show that there
is, if you look at the reports on standardized test
scores, there's some kind of decline nationwide.
But if you compare what we're getting here, our SAT
scores are above the standard. I'm not sure
exactly what it is, but you can report it. The
engineering people that I've interviewed here
have concurred in that assessment. All the others
have seen it, too. Do you have any figures on the
number of women in the program of the 1,800
students? Just an estimate.
Other than the fact that we have the largest
percentage of women in any of the industrial
engineering departments, I honestly can't give
you that estimate. Would you say it's under 10% or
over? No, it's over. But under 20?
I'd say that it's over 20. I think
that the... I could look at that right quick. We
just need a rough estimate. Maybe a four. I would
say somewhere, yeah, I would say that. Probably
25%. Okay, so industrial engineering attracts
more women than the other fields of engineering.
Yes. All right. Do you have any idea of why that
might be the case? Well, again, included in this
department are those technologies that relate
more to the human element of engineering. Safety
engineering, bioengineering, industrial
engineering. Industrial engineering has
always, in the past, been known as the management
engineering field. As such, I really think that
human element is what attracts more women Do you
have any figures on the number of black steels that
grow in this department?
No. Again, we probably, percentage-wise, have
more than the other departments,
but we just don't have those figures. Is it under
5%?
Yes. Do you have any idea why relatively few blacks
enroll in engineering here? This seems to be a
situation throughout all the departments. Yeah,
I think that the black student typically does not
get introduced to some of the quantitative and
physical sciences emphasis in the high schools.
as typically
the white student does. Engineering is a tougher
curriculum. You don't quite have the background
at the time to get into it. The failure rate's high,
and there's less of a tendency to get involved in
something that isn't high-productively
failure. Do you have any statistics on what your
dropout rate or attrition rate is in industrial
engineering? I mean, what percent of the people
who start the program never
complete it? We're pretty much on the same
college. I actually forgot what that is. I forgot
what that percentage is. Did you get that from any
of the other department heads? The other
engineering department people have been saying
that roughly half who began never complete. It's
about a 50-50 situation. They're about as likely
to finish as they're not. That's what the others
have found. I think that's probably right. I think
it probably is a little bit more than that, though,
in that I'd say probably 60% finish. That's been
steadily improving, or slightly improving over
the last few years. At least the college has given
us that data. What about the job prospects of
people with bachelor's degrees in industrial
engineering? It's never been better. What salary
can they expect starting out with a bachelor's
degree? Well, I would say you're talking about,
again, there's a range here, depending if the
person's had a co-op experience, in grades and
things like that, but I would say that
you're talking about a low end of the spectrum of
probably $19,000 a year in the upper range of
something like 23. This is last year's. Is it
higher for a master's or a doctorate? Yes. How
much? Oh, again, because a person with a master's
degree will have other experience normally. But
let's assume that there's just no experience
that's gone straight through. There's no
additional experience. You're talking about
probably another $2,000 for a master's degree, an
annual, and you're probably talking about maybe
$5,000. What are some of the firms that hire
industrial engineers?
By name or by? If you could give us that, just to give
an idea, because the average person probably
doesn't have any idea where an industrial
engineer works. Well, more recently, the oil
companies have come in and been sort of purchasing
the industrial engineer. planning and decision
making purposes. But typically they have been all
the manufacturing industries.
Steel, metal cutting, aerospace.
Again, mostly the manufacturing. Most of the
graduates of the program have several job
opportunities to pick from. I would say that
typically you're talking about probably six to
seven offers per student.
Regarding the industrial engineering
department, do you have any idea on how many
universities across the nation offer programs in
this field? Yeah, about 140. It's a lot of them. Do
you have any idea on how the A&M program ranks
others nationwide? Well, according to all the...
There's several ranking
sources in what's called the Dorman Report, which
is one a lot of people look at. We rank 10th in the
nation. In the... American Society of
Engineering Education rankings, they rank you on
several different categories in terms of faculty
quality, amount of research, amount of
resources. There's about five different places
they rank you, and we're in the top five. Normally
any one of those. Sometimes we're number one,
sometimes we're always number five. We're
typically in the top five in the way the ASEE ranks.
What is ASEE? American Society of Engineering
Education. Is the faculty considered your strong
point in your
program? Faculty and our research departments.
Where are some of the schools that the faculty
members are from? Well, Mr. Black, you name it. We
have some from around our own area, the University
of Texas, Arkansas, taking into account some of
those numbers.
Texas, outside Texas, we've got people from the
University of Oklahoma, we've got people from
Oklahoma State, we've got people from
Purdue, University of Michigan,
Penn State, University of Pittsburgh. You're
teaching faculty members whole PhDs? All of what
we consider our senior faculty members on the
Ph.D. What are some of the weaknesses, if any, of
the program? Well, at the current time, problems
are associated with space and just to handle
students. We have been teaching those. We're
having to handle students put more students in
laboratories
than you've got facilities in. That damages the
quality of your teaching. When you have to put more
students in a classroom, a faculty member is
accustomed to really handle the standpoint of
trying to teach engineering. That's a problem.
The last three years or so, we've faced situations
where we just don't have enough classrooms, we
don't have enough faculty.
What about funding from the state legislature for
industrial engineering? Is there enough, do you
consider it funding to be adequate?
In terms of, our funding from the legislature
comes in two ways, faculty salaries and
department operating money. The problems that
we're experiencing now is that we stay two years
behind the growth curve. We're funded on a
biennial basis in the state so that money we're
getting in any one time is basically behind. And if
you're not in a growth mode, everything's fine.
And I would say that we're happy to fund it. But in
these periods of growth where we've been saved by
hand, our funds have not been, we have not been
added to the funding in terms of the growth, in
terms of the way the budget operates in the state.
Do you have any figures on what your department
budget is for this year?
Yeah, I do. I can't add
that to the plan. Okay. Okay. Actually, the reason
I can't say that because I don't, they really don't
pass the budget. Well, for the past year. Well, the
past year, yes. In terms of our academic money, we
had, in the Department of Law, we had $1.8 million.
Okay. What about sources of funding for research
programs? What's the sources of those? We run, for
the past five years, have been one of the major...
departments of economy and engineering in terms
of research, dollar volume produced. We run about
2 million a year. And our sources are fairly well
divided in terms of state sources and federal
sources. And then I would say that one's about 40%,
40%, and
there's about 20% that we've picked up local
industry, or industry sources. One of those
specific examples of industry, we have been
funded by General Dynamics, LTV, and some smaller
manufacturing
companies. I can't recall the names now. From a
state standpoint, we have been funded for
research by cities. El Paso, Arlington, some of
our major contributors. We've developed the
software systems for them. From the standpoint
of, we've also received the funds from some of
the state agencies. One of the governor's
offices. We've received some research from Texas
Education Agency. Going to the federal level, we
receive funds from the National Science
Foundation, Department of Defense,
Department of Energy. That's sort of what's
matter.
Could you discuss, Dr. Ellis, specifically some
of the research endeavors that are now underway or
that have recently been completed? Well, I'll
probably touch on the ones that are or most
interesting, which we have probably made a name
for ourselves nationally and internationally.
And that is in the, and that is an ongoing research
program that started about five years ago and will
be continuing the next five years, I believe. It's
an area in which we have some of my faculty applying
engineering techniques to try to understand
food-bearing plants. The idea is that we can apply
engineering techniques to understand and model
and describe how a plant that bears food actually
operates given the conditions in which it exists,
whether it's water, sunlight, how it uses
nutrients, and so forth. We feel like then we can
tell the person in the agricultural field how to
optimize or increase food production. It's a
rather unique, ingenious approach that says I can
look at a plant, a food plant, just like I look at a
manufacturing facility. If I can describe it
mathematically well enough, then I can tell you
what you need to change to make that plant produce
better. And it has caught the attention of people
at the national and international level. We have
several faculty. There's no food conference
given even internationally. Some of our faculty
are not always invited
to give presentations and so forth. That's
probably the area in which, well, one other area
also connected to engineering applied to
problems that you may not think that they would be
applied to. And also using the techniques to model
the growth and spread of insects that are damaging
the crops. Ways to detect them. how
to sample
them to describe their spread, and
then how to optimize the use of pesticides to stop
the spread. I guess the major
project being in the Pine Parkville area. The
insect is quite damaging to the pine and lumber
industry. That's an area in which we have made
quite an impact. Now, outside of that, we have the
typical areas that we normally do research in. We
do part of the research and manufacturing area. We
have a person that recently developed a
computerized model for describing and
understanding the modular manufacturing
process. It has been introduced and being used by
several industries.
We cooperate with Texas Transportation
Institute in the study of the driver. One of our
faculty has been involved in the
state-of-the-art study of providing a real-time
information display system to the highway,
interstate
highway. Those are
the three major projects that have gone on and are
still going on right now. There's a multiplicity
of smaller ones. Are these projects done by
faculty members and graduate students? Yes sir.
Where do they conduct their research? Well, if
it's the modeling research, this is sort of a
paper-pencil-computer approach with field
data. Some of the field data is collected in
cooperation with the College of Agriculture.
This is engineering agriculture studies. And
some of the field data is collected right now on
people's farms, meadows, and so forth. Tele-type
back into the
computer communications. Obviously
the highway type stuff is done with TTI facilities
either out of the annex, but some of the facilities
are in the actual context of the roadway, Houston,
Dallas,
and so forth. How many of your faculty members have
joint appointments through TTI in addition to
being on the teaching faculty?
Well, this will vary as a function of research
needs at TTI, but any given semester we'll
probably
be sharing about three faculty at TTI. Let me
switch the tape just a second.
The last thing I want to ask you about is the changes
that you've seen here since you were a student in
the early 50s and since you came in 69 up to this
time. So just a broad change that you've seen.